Click "More Help" again to close this window.
 
Usage Info: Use the keys on your keyboard 1 through = to play any of the 12 notes; use q through ] to play only those highlighted in the current scale. If you try to play a chord (try q+e+t keys simultaneously), you will see it (if it's major, minor, augmented, dimished, or 7th)! Since most keyboards don't support many simultaneous key presses, you can also click on notes with your mouse, and then click "Play Selected" to play them simultaneously. If you want to change the instrument or scale, you need to then click the "Update" button. If you play a Caug chord, you can "unlock" a neat sound visualization. Play C#aug to turn it back off again.
 
 
Longer Info/Music Theory Stuff: This little program is designed to visualize and explore some of the properties of (western) musical scales and chords. 
 
An "octave" is represented by two sounds with a 2X relationship of frequency; for example an A note on a piano is roughly 110 vibrations per second (hertz, or Hz), and the next higher A note will be double this at around 220 (and the next higher double again at 440). When these two notes are sounded together, they will sound nearly identical to the human ear (because the sound waves overlap so well). In western music, the range of sounds in between these notes is usually divided up into eleven smaller steps -- A#, B, C, C#, D, D#, E, F, F#, G, G#. The notes shown in our exploration are these twelve steps, from A to G#, within one octave. In this way, if we consider that the next higher A note will sound very similar to the lower one, the 12 notes "wrap around" in a circular fashion, as shown here. (Note, clearly the next higher A doesn't sound exactly the same, it's higher in pitch, and that's why pianos have more than twelve keys, allowing for a greater range of sounds! But our visualization does only have twelve sounds, for clarity.) 
 
While two notes that have a 2X frequency ratio sound almost identical to the human ear (because they overlap so well), two notes that share a frequency ratio of 1.5X sound
extremely pleasing to the human ear. For example, an A note with a frequency of 110 Hz will combine with an E note that is ~165 Hz (110*1.5), such that the sound waves will overlap and create a "phantom" frequency of 55 (110/2 and 165/3), which is actually the A note of the lower octave! A note that has this relationship with another is called a "perfect fifth," for reasons that hopefully this visualization will make clear and we'll explain in a bit.
 
Consider A (say, at 110 HZ) and it's perfect fifth, E (165 Hz), and then further consider the perfect fifth of E, which is B at ~246 Hz (165*1.5). This is above the next highest A, but we can drop it back down a full octave and get practically the same sound from the lower B which sits at ~123 (246/2). If we make music using only these notes, it will sound pleasing to the ear due to these fifth relationships. Although every note has a pleasing fifth (and we'd go from B to F#, eventually through A#, and finally all the way back around to A), that doesn't mean we can continue in this way and use all the 12 notes in any piece of music! Try, for example, playing A and A# together - the sound waves don't sound pleasing together. So, it makes sense to try and select subsets of notes that tend to sound pleasing together in various combinations by selecting a handful of those that play well as perfect fifths. The is what the 8 notes of the major scale do quite well - a scale is simply a pattern through the notes; and since the set of notes works like a circle, the pattern can start at any note--hence distinct scales with similar patterns and sounds like "A major" and "C major". As a bonus, these 8 notes of the major scale also contain other pleasing note pairs, such as major thirds (5/4 = 1.25X, which is "up four steps", e.g. A to C#) and minor thirds (6/5 = 1.2X, "up three steps", e.g. A to C). In fact, from these sets of 8 come the names of the relationships: in the set of 8 notes starting at A, the note with 1.5X frequency is the fifth. (As for why thirds are named they way they are, that's a bit of music theory lore I haven't gotten to myself yet.)
 
In our visualization, notes are colored according to the the relationship of fifths, and if you like you can rearrange their location according to the "circle of fifths." Also, if you a note and it's fifth, a colored line is drawn between them. Try seeing how many fifth relationships you can find between all the notes of a scale. Note that most chords (major and minor chords) contain this fifth relationship, as well as either a minor or major third. (In the major and minor scales, this results in basic chords being made up of every other note in the scale; try pressing your keyboard keys q+e+r, or w+r+y, or e+t+u.) Other scale types represent different patterns and subsets of the 12 notes, which are often quite similar to the major scale. In fact, the minor scale has exactly the same pattern and uses the same notes (and hence the same chords), but the pattern starts in middle - try visualizing this by changing from C Major to A Minor.
 
There's one other very interesting, but complex, caveat of the music theory scene ()